Tell me about yourself; give me a little sketch.

I can’t enter your doors again!

I will be proud only of you

Will you meet me in the
Square in the afternoon?

We must settle something—we must take a line,

It is very good of you to do it first,

The young
man—the happy lover—generally does that.  But just as you please!

You will need all your powers of persuasion.  But, after all, you are irresistible.

As much so as possible,

It won’t be much use, but I
shall try.  I certainly would rather have you easily than have to fight
for you.

Ah, we must be prepared, you especially, because for
you it must come hardest.  Do you know the first thing your father will
say to you?

But he will be sure to say
it,

No, it’s a
misfortune, It is from that our difficulty will
come.

I will leave
my defence to you; it’s a charge that a man has to stoop to defend
himself from.

You will cleave to me? You know you are your own
mistress—you are of age.

He was terribly violent, but you know my self-control.  I have need of it all when I remember
that I have it in my power to break in upon your cruel captivity.

Will you marry me
tomorrow?

Why, you must take me or leave me, You
can’t please your father and me both; you must choose between us.

Do you think it is in the least degree likely?

Strong? I would rather you should think them weak.

You are terribly afraid of him!

He was very positive about this, was he? He thought such a message would annoy me terribly, and
make me throw off the mask, eh?

Please tell him that I care for his message as much as for that!

Do you know you sometimes disappoint me?

I suppose it seems to you a kind of curse, It must be
very dismal.  But don’t you think, that if you
were to try to be very clever, and to set rightly about it, you might in
the end conjure it away?  Don’t you think, that a really clever woman, in your
place, might bring him round at last?  Don’t you think?

Yes, I verily believe that your poor father
will be disappointed!  But you will have seen Europe, What a take-in!

Doesn’t he want to deceive you? It will serve him
right!  I really think you had better go.

Be married when you come back.  You can buy your wedding clothes in
Paris.

The same—only more so!

My poor dear girl!

You had better let me try him!

Brilliantly, and we shall certainly be very comfortable.  But it isn’t
of the mere material comfort I speak; it is of the moral comfort, of the intellectual satisfaction!

Oh, bother!

Simply? I am much obliged for that!

Upon my word, you are a queer family!

I am not at all well,

I am too proud,

You know people talk tremendously about a man’s marrying a rich girl, It’s excessively disagreeable.

There are some things which we can’t
very well bear together—for instance, separation.

All women do!

I don’t earn my living with you, Or rather, that’s just what I do—or what the world says
I do!

Do you suppose I would take you to a nest of yellow fever? Do you suppose I would expose you at such a time as this?

It is to make six thousand dollars, Do you grudge me
that satisfaction?

You said you wouldn’t make a scene! I call this a
scene.

Very well, then; we won’t talk about
it any more.  I will transact my business by letter.

Do you want to make conditions? I will come next
Saturday.”

When you are quiet, you
are perfection, but when you are violent, you are not in
character.

I said Saturday!

I am a busy man—I am not a dangler!

I will write to you—that is better,

Ah, dearest lady, you do me injustice! We have
only waited, and now we are free.

There are worse fates than that! Catherine, have you never forgiven me?

Ah, you are angry!

Why have you never
married? You have had opportunities.

Well, I was in
hopes that we might still have been friends.

Goodbye, then, Excuse my indiscretion.
Oh, a position is more than I should presume to call it

That sounds so fine.  I should like some quiet
work—something to turn an honest penny.

Ah, I don’t know what to answer when you say that!
You advise me, then, not to despair?

Ah, yes, with discretion

Well, I have been indiscreet, formerly; but I think I have got over it.
I am very steady now.

Were you kindly intending to
propose something for my advantage?

I am afraid I shouldn’t be able to manage that.  I must seek my fortune
here or nowhere.  You see, I have ties—I have
responsibilities here.  I have a sister, a widow, from whom I have been
separated for a long time, and to whom I am almost everything.  I
shouldn’t like to say to her that I must leave her.  She rather depends
upon me, you see.

Ah, my little nephews and nieces—that’s the very point!  I am helping to
bring them up,

I am a kind of amateur tutor; I
give them lessons.

If my situation becomes desperate I shall perhaps take the liberty of
reminding you!

I should have done so

if you had not had so much the
appearance of leaving your daughter at liberty.  She seems to me quite
her own mistress.

It was not long ago, certainly, I
admit that we have not been slow to—to arrive at an understanding.  But
that was very natural, from the moment we were sure of ourselves—and of
each other.  My interest in Miss Sloper began the first time I saw her.

I certainly had already heard that she
was a charming girl.

I don’t know what I might think of her if I were
her father.  I can’t put myself in that place.  I speak from my own point
of view.

She let me know as much, and I was very sorry to hear it.  I am greatly
disappointed.

I don’t think Miss Sloper is a
weak woman,

But your daughter doesn’t marry a category, She marries an individual—an individual whom she is so
good as to say she loves.

There is one thing you should add to them, the word of a
gentleman!

I see; you think I am an idler!

You think I would squander her money.

That’s because I spent my own, I suppose, I frankly
confess that.  I have been wild.  I have been foolish.  I will tell you
every crazy thing I ever did, if you like.  There were some great follies
among the number—I have never concealed that.  But I have sown my wild
oats.  Isn’t there some proverb about a reformed rake?  I was not a rake,
but I assure you I have reformed.  It is better to have amused oneself
for a while and have done with it.  Your daughter would never care for a
milksop; and I will take the liberty of saying that you would like one
quite as little.  Besides, between my money and hers there is a great
difference.  I spent my own; it was because it was my own that I spent
it.  And I made no debts; when it was gone I stopped.  I don’t owe a
penny in the world.

I am living on the remnants of my property,

Even admitting I
attach an undue importance to Miss Sloper’s fortune, would
not that be in itself an assurance that I should take much care of it?

For a twelvemonth!

Ah, you are not polite, sir!

Are you sure of that? are you sure your daughter will
give me up?

I too have a fund of
affection to draw upon!

Your opposition to my marriage is all the more
cruel, then!  Do you intend to forbid your daughter to see me again?

I don’t think she will,

She has gone too far,

I will say no more, sir!
