So Catherine saw Mr. Townsend alone, and her aunt did not come in even at
the end of the visit.  The visit was a long one; he sat there—in the
front parlour, in the biggest armchair—for more than an hour.  He seemed
more at home this time—more familiar; lounging a little in the chair,
slapping a cushion that was near him with his stick, and looking round
the room a good deal, and at the objects it contained, as well as at
Catherine; whom, however, he also contemplated freely.  There was a smile
of respectful devotion in his handsome eyes which seemed to Catherine
almost solemnly beautiful; it made her think of a young knight in a poem.
His talk, however, was not particularly knightly; it was light and easy
and friendly; it took a practical turn, and he asked a number of
questions about herself—what were her tastes—if she liked this and
that—what were her habits.  He said to her, with his charming smile,
“Tell me about yourself; give me a little sketch.”  Catherine had very
little to tell, and she had no talent for sketching; but before he went
she had confided to him that she had a secret passion for the theatre,
which had been but scantily gratified, and a taste for operatic
music—that of Bellini and Donizetti, in especial (it must be remembered
in extenuation of this primitive young woman that she held these opinions
in an age of general darkness)—which she rarely had an occasion to hear,
except on the hand-organ.  She confessed that she was not particularly
fond of literature.  Morris Townsend agreed with her that books were
tiresome things; only, as he said, you had to read a good many before you
found it out.  He had been to places that people had written books about,
and they were not a bit like the descriptions.  To see for yourself—that
was the great thing; he always tried to see for himself.  He had seen all
the principal actors—he had been to all the best theatres in London and
Paris.  But the actors were always like the authors—they always
exaggerated.  He liked everything to be natural.  Suddenly he stopped,
looking at Catherine with his smile.

The Doctor stood staring; he wondered whether his daughter were serious.
Catherine went straight to her own room, and by the time she reached it
she bethought herself that there was something else—something better—she
might have said.  She almost wished, now, that her father would ask his
question again, so that she might reply: “Oh yes, Mr. Morris Townsend
proposed to me, and I refused him!”

“She has got such an artificial mind,” said Mrs. Almond, who always
enjoyed an opportunity to discuss Lavinia’s peculiarities with her
brother.  “She didn’t want me to tell you that she had asked me about Mr.
Townsend; but I told her I would.  She always wants to conceal
everything.”

“Arthur is not a little boy; he is a very old man; you and I will never
be so old.  He is a distant relation of Lavinia’s _protégé_.  The name is
the same, but I am given to understand that there are Townsends and
Townsends.  So Arthur’s mother tells me; she talked about
‘branches’—younger branches, elder branches, inferior branches—as if it
were a royal house.  Arthur, it appears, is of the reigning line, but
poor Lavinia’s young man is not.  Beyond this, Arthur’s mother knows very
little about him; she has only a vague story that he has been ‘wild.’
But I know his sister a little, and she is a very nice woman.  Her name
is Mrs. Montgomery; she is a widow, with a little property and five
children.  She lives in the Second Avenue.”

“Mr. Townsend is not old enough, then; his motives may be pure.”

He came very soon again, and Mrs. Penniman had of course great pleasure
in executing this mission.  Morris Townsend accepted her invitation with
equal good grace, and the dinner took place a few days later.  The Doctor
had said to himself, justly enough, that they must not have the young man
alone; this would partake too much of the nature of encouragement.  So
two or three other persons were invited; but Morris Townsend, though he
was by no means the ostensible, was the real, occasion of the feast.
There is every reason to suppose that he desired to make a good
impression; and if he fell short of this result, it was not for want of a
good deal of intelligent effort.  The Doctor talked to him very little
during dinner; but he observed him attentively, and after the ladies had
gone out he pushed him the wine and asked him several questions.  Morris
was not a young man who needed to be pressed, and he found quite enough
encouragement in the superior quality of the claret.  The Doctor’s wine
was admirable, and it may be communicated to the reader that while he
sipped it Morris reflected that a cellar-full of good liquor—there was
evidently a cellar-full here—would be a most attractive idiosyncrasy in a
father-in-law.  The Doctor was struck with his appreciative guest; he saw
that he was not a commonplace young man.  “He has ability,” said
Catherine’s father, “decided ability; he has a very good head if he
chooses to use it.  And he is uncommonly well turned out; quite the sort
of figure that pleases the ladies.  But I don’t think I like him.”  The
Doctor, however, kept his reflexions to himself, and talked to his
visitors about foreign lands, concerning which Morris offered him more
information than he was ready, as he mentally phrased it, to swallow.
Dr. Sloper had travelled but little, and he took the liberty of not
believing everything this anecdotical idler narrated.  He prided himself
on being something of a physiognomist, and while the young man, chatting
with easy assurance, puffed his cigar and filled his glass again, the
Doctor sat with his eyes quietly fixed on his bright, expressive face.
“He has the assurance of the devil himself,” said Morris’s host; “I don’t
think I ever saw such assurance.  And his powers of invention are most
remarkable.  He is very knowing; they were not so knowing as that in my
time.  And a good head, did I say?  I should think so—after a bottle of
Madeira and a bottle and a half of claret!”

“He doesn’t like me—he doesn’t like me at all,” said Morris Townsend,
addressing the aunt in the same manner as he had done the niece.  “He
thinks I’m all wrong.”

“Ah, you say the right thing!” said Morris, greatly to the gratification
of Mrs. Penniman, who prided herself on always saying the right thing.

“Ah, take care!  Remember that he is a branch of the Townsends.”


IF it were true that she was in love, she was certainly very quiet about
it; but the Doctor was of course prepared to admit that her quietness
might mean volumes.  She had told Morris Townsend that she would not
mention him to her father, and she saw no reason to retract this vow of
discretion.  It was no more than decently civil, of course, that after
having dined in Washington Square, Morris should call there again; and it
was no more than natural that, having been kindly received on this
occasion, he should continue to present himself.  He had had plenty of
leisure on his hands; and thirty years ago, in New York, a young man of
leisure had reason to be thankful for aids to self-oblivion.  Catherine
said nothing to her father about these visits, though they had rapidly
become the most important, the most absorbing thing in her life.  The
girl was very happy.  She knew not as yet what would come of it; but the
present had suddenly grown rich and solemn.  If she had been told she was
in love, she would have been a good deal surprised; for she had an idea
that love was an eager and exacting passion, and her own heart was filled
in these days with the impulse of self-effacement and sacrifice.
Whenever Morris Townsend had left the house, her imagination projected
itself, with all its strength, into the idea of his soon coming back; but
if she had been told at such a moment that he would not return for a
year, or even that he would never return, she would not have complained
nor rebelled, but would have humbly accepted the decree, and sought for
consolation in thinking over the times she had already seen him, the
words he had spoken, the sound of his voice, of his tread, the expression
of his face.  Love demands certain things as a right; but Catherine had
no sense of her rights; she had only a consciousness of immense and
unexpected favours.  Her very gratitude for these things had hushed
itself; for it seemed to her that there would be something of impudence
in making a festival of her secret.  Her father suspected Morris
Townsend’s visits, and noted her reserve.  She seemed to beg pardon for
it; she looked at him constantly in silence, as if she meant to say that
she said nothing because she was afraid of irritating him.  But the poor
girl’s dumb eloquence irritated him more than anything else would have
done, and he caught himself murmuring more than once that it was a
grievous pity his only child was a simpleton.  His murmurs, however, were
inaudible; and for a while he said nothing to any one.  He would have
liked to know exactly how often young Townsend came; but he had
determined to ask no questions of the girl herself—to say nothing more to
her that would show that he watched her.  The Doctor had a great idea of
being largely just: he wished to leave his daughter her liberty, and
interfere only when the danger should be proved.  It was not in his
manner to obtain information by indirect methods, and it never even
occurred to him to question the servants.  As for Lavinia, he hated to
talk to her about the matter; she annoyed him with her mock romanticism.
But he had to come to this.  Mrs. Penniman’s convictions as regards the
relations of her niece and the clever young visitor who saved appearances
by coming ostensibly for both the ladies—Mrs. Penniman’s convictions had
passed into a riper and richer phase.  There was to be no crudity in Mrs.
Penniman’s treatment of the situation; she had become as uncommunicative
as Catherine herself.  She was tasting of the sweets of concealment; she
had taken up the line of mystery.  “She would be enchanted to be able to
prove to herself that she is persecuted,” said the Doctor; and when at
last he questioned her, he was sure she would contrive to extract from
his words a pretext for this belief.

“I don’t pretend to be graceful, though I try to be neat.  Why haven’t
you let me know that Mr. Morris Townsend is coming to the house four
times a week?”

“I don’t know what you mean by an alliance,” said Mrs. Penniman.  “I take
a great interest in Mr. Townsend; I won’t conceal that.  But that’s all.”

“Under the circumstances, that is quite enough.  What is the source of
your interest in Mr. Townsend?”

“Ah, he has had misfortunes?  That, of course, is always interesting.
Are you at liberty to mention a few of Mr. Townsend’s?”

“Townsend is trying to marry her—is that what you mean?”

“Catherine has a lovely nature, Austin,” said Mrs. Penniman, “and Mr.
Townsend has had the intelligence to discover that.”

“So Mr. Townsend says,” observed Lavinia, smiling.

“It must be deucedly pleasant for a plain inanimate girl like that to
have a beautiful young fellow come and sit down beside her and whisper to
her that he is her slave—if that is what this one whispers.  No wonder
she likes it, and that she thinks me a cruel tyrant; which of course she
does, though she is afraid—she hasn’t the animation necessary—to admit it
to herself.  Poor old Catherine!” mused the Doctor; “I verily believe she
is capable of defending me when Townsend abuses me!”

“We will try him again,” said the Doctor.  And he crossed the room and
joined his sister and her companion, making her a sign that she should
leave the young man to him.  She presently did so, while Morris looked at
him, smiling, without a sign of evasiveness in his affable eye.

“Oh, a position is more than I should presume to call it,” Morris
Townsend answered.  “That sounds so fine.  I should like some quiet
work—something to turn an honest penny.”

“Ah,” Townsend murmured, “I don’t know what to answer when you say that!
You advise me, then, not to despair?”

“Ah, yes, with discretion,” Morris Townsend repeated sympathetically.
“Well, I have been indiscreet, formerly; but I think I have got over it.
I am very steady now.”  And he stood a moment, looking down at his
remarkably neat shoes.  Then at last, “Were you kindly intending to
propose something for my advantage?” he inquired, looking up and smiling.

“I am afraid I shouldn’t be able to manage that.  I must seek my fortune
here or nowhere.  You see,” added Morris Townsend, “I have ties—I have
responsibilities here.  I have a sister, a widow, from whom I have been
separated for a long time, and to whom I am almost everything.  I
shouldn’t like to say to her that I must leave her.  She rather depends
upon me, you see.”

“Ah, my little nephews and nieces—that’s the very point!  I am helping to
bring them up,” said Morris Townsend.  “I am a kind of amateur tutor; I
give them lessons.”

“If my situation becomes desperate I shall perhaps take the liberty of
reminding you!” Morris rejoined, raising his voice a little, with a
brighter smile, as his interlocutor turned away.

“He certainly has not the cut of a schoolmaster!” Mrs. Almond said to
herself a short time afterwards, as she saw Morris Townsend in a corner
bending over her niece, who was seated.

Townsend shook his head gloomily.  “I can’t enter your doors again!”

“Oh, Mr. Townsend!” murmured Catherine.  She trembled as she wondered
what had happened, whether her father had forbidden it.

“I will be proud only of you,” Morris answered.  “Will you meet me in the
Square in the afternoon?”

“We must settle something—we must take a line,” he declared, passing his
hand through his hair and giving a glance at the long narrow mirror which
adorned the space between the two windows, and which had at its base a
little gilded bracket covered by a thin slab of white marble, supporting
in its turn a backgammon board folded together in the shape of two
volumes, two shining folios inscribed in letters of greenish gilt,
_History of England_.  If Morris had been pleased to describe the master
of the house as a heartless scoffer, it is because he thought him too
much on his guard, and this was the easiest way to express his own
dissatisfaction—a dissatisfaction which he had made a point of concealing
from the Doctor.  It will probably seem to the reader, however, that the
Doctor’s vigilance was by no means excessive, and that these two young
people had an open field.  Their intimacy was now considerable, and it
may appear that for a shrinking and retiring person our heroine had been
liberal of her favours.  The young man, within a few days, had made her
listen to things for which she had not supposed that she was prepared;
having a lively foreboding of difficulties, he proceeded to gain as much
ground as possible in the present.  He remembered that fortune favours
the brave, and even if he had forgotten it, Mrs. Penniman would have
remembered it for him.  Mrs. Penniman delighted of all things in a drama,
and she flattered herself that a drama would now be enacted.  Combining
as she did the zeal of the prompter with the impatience of the spectator,
she had long since done her utmost to pull up the curtain.  She too
expected to figure in the performance—to be the confidante, the Chorus,
to speak the epilogue.  It may even be said that there were times when
she lost sight altogether of the modest heroine of the play, in the
contemplation of certain great passages which would naturally occur
between the hero and herself.

“It is very good of you to do it first,” Morris answered.  “The young
man—the happy lover—generally does that.  But just as you please!”

“You will need all your powers of persuasion.  But, after all,” Morris
added, “you are irresistible.”

“As much so as possible,” Morris promised.  “It won’t be much use, but I
shall try.  I certainly would rather have you easily than have to fight
for you.”

“Ah, we must be prepared,” Morris rejoined; “you especially, because for
you it must come hardest.  Do you know the first thing your father will
say to you?”

“No, Morris; please tell me.”

The exclamation was so deprecating and touching that Morris indulged in
another little demonstration of affection.  “But he will be sure to say
it,” he added.

Morris turned away, looking into the crown of his hat.  “No, it’s a
misfortune,” he said at last.  “It is from that our difficulty will
come.”

Morris Townsend listened to this robust logic in silence.  “I will leave
my defence to you; it’s a charge that a man has to stoop to defend
himself from.”

Catherine on her side was silent for a while; she was looking at him
while he looked, with a good deal of fixedness, out of the window.
“Morris,” she said abruptly, “are you very sure you love me?”

“You will cleave to me?” said Morris.  “You know you are your own
mistress—you are of age.”

“Ah, Morris!” she murmured, for all answer.  Or rather not for all; for
she put her hand into his own.  He kept it a while, and presently he
kissed her again.  This is all that need be recorded of their
conversation; but Mrs. Penniman, if she had been present, would probably
have admitted that it was as well it had not taken place beside the
fountain in Washington Square.

“I shall be very happy to hear it, my dear,” said her father.  He
waited—waited, looking at her, while she stared, in a long silence, at
the fire.  He was curious and impatient, for he was sure she was going to
speak of Morris Townsend; but he let her take her own time, for he was
determined to be very mild.

“Mr. Morris Townsend.”  And as she pronounced her lover’s name, Catherine
looked at him.  What she saw was her father’s still grey eye and his
clear-cut, definite smile.  She contemplated these objects for a moment,
and then she looked back at the fire; it was much warmer.

“Was Mr. Townsend here?”

Her father was silent a moment.  “Mr. Townsend ought to have told me.”

Her father glanced at her an instant, removing his eyes from the fire.
“I don’t wonder Mr. Townsend likes you.  You are so simple and so good.”

“And are you very fond of Mr. Townsend?”

“I was afraid you didn’t like Mr. Townsend.”

“I know what you mean,” said Catherine, remembering how Morris had
forewarned her.  “You mean that he is mercenary.”

Her father looked up at her still, with his cold, quiet reasonable eye.
“If I meant it, my dear, I should say it!  But there is an error I wish
particularly to avoid—that of rendering Mr. Townsend more interesting to
you by saying hard things about him.”

The Doctor smiled a little.  “Very true.  You have a perfect right to ask
for them.”  And he puffed his cigar a few moments.  “Very well, then,
without accusing Mr. Townsend of being in love only with your fortune—and
with the fortune that you justly expect—I will say that there is every
reason to suppose that these good things have entered into his
calculation more largely than a tender solicitude for your happiness
strictly requires.  There is, of course, nothing impossible in an
intelligent young man entertaining a disinterested affection for you.
You are an honest, amiable girl, and an intelligent young man might
easily find it out.  But the principal thing that we know about this
young man—who is, indeed, very intelligent—leads us to suppose that,
however much he may value your personal merits, he values your money
more.  The principal thing we know about him is that he has led a life of
dissipation, and has spent a fortune of his own in doing so.  That is
enough for me, my dear.  I wish you to marry a young man with other
antecedents—a young man who could give positive guarantees.  If Morris
Townsend has spent his own fortune in amusing himself, there is every
reason to believe that he would spend yours.”

“Yes, I think I know how you feel,” the Doctor said.  “I will be very
kind—be sure of that.  And I will see Mr. Townsend to-morrow.  Meanwhile,
and for the present, be so good as to mention to no one that you are
engaged.”


ON the morrow, in the afternoon, he stayed at home, awaiting Mr.
Townsend’s call—a proceeding by which it appeared to him (justly perhaps,
for he was a very busy man) that he paid Catherine’s suitor great honour,
and gave both these young people so much the less to complain of.  Morris
presented himself with a countenance sufficiently serene—he appeared to
have forgotten the “insult” for which he had solicited Catherine’s
sympathy two evenings before, and Dr. Sloper lost no time in letting him
know that he had been prepared for his visit.

“I should have done so,” Morris answered, “if you had not had so much the
appearance of leaving your daughter at liberty.  She seems to me quite
her own mistress.”

“It was not long ago, certainly,” said Morris, with great gravity.  “I
admit that we have not been slow to—to arrive at an understanding.  But
that was very natural, from the moment we were sure of ourselves—and of
each other.  My interest in Miss Sloper began the first time I saw her.”

Morris looked at him an instant.  “I certainly had already heard that she
was a charming girl.”

Morris Townsend received this statement with a smile that was not wholly
devoid of deference.  “I don’t know what I might think of her if I were
her father.  I can’t put myself in that place.  I speak from my own point
of view.”

“She let me know as much, and I was very sorry to hear it.  I am greatly
disappointed.”  And Morris sat in silence awhile, looking at the floor.

Morris Townsend listened respectfully.  “I don’t think Miss Sloper is a
weak woman,” he presently said.

“But your daughter doesn’t marry a category,” Townsend urged, with his
handsome smile.  “She marries an individual—an individual whom she is so
good as to say she loves.”

“There is one thing you should add to them,” said Morris; “the word of a
gentleman!”

“I see; you think I am an idler!” Morris exclaimed, a little too much in
the tone of a man who has made a discovery.  But he saw his error
immediately, and blushed.

But Morris persisted.  “You think I would squander her money.”

“That’s because I spent my own, I suppose,” said Morris.  “I frankly
confess that.  I have been wild.  I have been foolish.  I will tell you
every crazy thing I ever did, if you like.  There were some great follies
among the number—I have never concealed that.  But I have sown my wild
oats.  Isn’t there some proverb about a reformed rake?  I was not a rake,
but I assure you I have reformed.  It is better to have amused oneself
for a while and have done with it.  Your daughter would never care for a
milksop; and I will take the liberty of saying that you would like one
quite as little.  Besides, between my money and hers there is a great
difference.  I spent my own; it was because it was my own that I spent
it.  And I made no debts; when it was gone I stopped.  I don’t owe a
penny in the world.”

“I am living on the remnants of my property,” said Morris Townsend.

Yes, certainly, Morris’s self-control was laudable.  “Even admitting I
attach an undue importance to Miss Sloper’s fortune,” he went on, “would
not that be in itself an assurance that I should take much care of it?”

“For a twelvemonth!” exclaimed Morris, with a laugh.

Here at last Morris lost his temper.  “Ah, you are not polite, sir!” he
cried.

“Are you sure of that?” asked Morris; “are you sure your daughter will
give me up?”

Morris Townsend began to smooth his hat again.  “I too have a fund of
affection to draw upon!” he observed at last.

Morris gave a laugh.  “Your opposition to my marriage is all the more
cruel, then!  Do you intend to forbid your daughter to see me again?”

“I don’t think she will,” said Morris Townsend.

“She has gone too far,” Morris went on.

The Doctor looked at him a moment; Morris had his hand on the door.
“There is a great deal of impertinence in your saying it.”

“I will say no more, sir!” Morris answered; and, making his bow, he left
the room.

“Perhaps Mr. Townsend is the twentieth case,” Mrs. Almond suggested.

“Perhaps he is, though he doesn’t look to me at all like a twentieth
case.  But I will give him the benefit of the doubt, and, to make sure, I
will go and talk with Mrs. Montgomery.  She will almost certainly tell me
I have done right; but it is just possible that she will prove to me that
I have made the greatest mistake of my life.  If she does, I will beg Mr.
Townsend’s pardon.  You needn’t invite her to meet me, as you kindly
proposed; I will write her a frank letter, telling her how matters stand,
and asking leave to come and see her.”

“Not to my knowledge.  Mr. Townsend can have had no particular interest
in bringing them together.”

“And if Morris should marry her, he—he—”  And she hesitated timidly.

“Does Morris know this?”

“What makes you dislike Morris so much?” she presently asked, emerging
from her reflexions.

“Ah, you are not to believe that Morris’s moral character is bad!”

“If there is anything you would like to say to me, you know you must not
hesitate.  You needn’t feel obliged to be so quiet.  I shouldn’t care
that Mr. Townsend should be a frequent topic of conversation, but
whenever you have anything particular to say about him I shall be very
glad to hear it.”

He never asked her whether she had seen Morris again, because he was sure
that if this had been the case she would tell him.  She had, in fact, not
seen him, she had only written him a long letter.  The letter at least
was long for her; and, it may be added, that it was long for Morris; it
consisted of five pages, in a remarkably neat and handsome hand.
Catherine’s handwriting was beautiful, and she was even a little proud of
it; she was extremely fond of copying, and possessed volumes of extracts
which testified to this accomplishment; volumes which she had exhibited
one day to her lover, when the bliss of feeling that she was important in
his eyes was exceptionally keen.  She told Morris in writing that her
father had expressed the wish that she should not see him again, and that
she begged he would not come to the house until she should have “made up
her mind.”  Morris replied with a passionate epistle, in which he asked
to what, in Heaven’s name, she wished to make up her mind.  Had not her
mind been made up two weeks before, and could it be possible that she
entertained the idea of throwing him off?  Did she mean to break down at
the very beginning of their ordeal, after all the promises of fidelity
she had both given and extracted?  And he gave an account of his own
interview with her father—an account not identical at all points with
that offered in these pages.  “He was terribly violent,” Morris wrote;
“but you know my self-control.  I have need of it all when I remember
that I have it in my power to break in upon your cruel captivity.”
Catherine sent him, in answer to this, a note of three lines.  “I am in
great trouble; do not doubt of my affection, but let me wait a little and
think.”  The idea of a struggle with her father, of setting up her will
against his own, was heavy on her soul, and it kept her formally
submissive, as a great physical weight keeps us motionless.  It never
entered into her mind to throw her lover off; but from the first she
tried to assure herself that there would be a peaceful way out of their
difficulty.  The assurance was vague, for it contained no element of
positive conviction that her father would change his mind.  She only had
an idea that if she should be very good, the situation would in some
mysterious manner improve.  To be good, she must be patient, respectful,
abstain from judging her father too harshly, and from committing any act
of open defiance.  He was perhaps right, after all, to think as he did;
by which Catherine meant not in the least that his judgement of Morris’s
motives in seeking to marry her was perhaps a just one, but that it was
probably natural and proper that conscientious parents should be
suspicious and even unjust.  There were probably people in the world as
bad as her father supposed Morris to be, and if there were the slightest
chance of Morris being one of these sinister persons, the Doctor was
right in taking it into account.  Of course he could not know what she
knew, how the purest love and truth were seated in the young man’s eyes;
but Heaven, in its time, might appoint a way of bringing him to such
knowledge.  Catherine expected a good deal of Heaven, and referred to the
skies the initiative, as the French say, in dealing with her dilemma.
She could not imagine herself imparting any kind of knowledge to her
father, there was something superior even in his injustice and absolute
in his mistakes.  But she could at least be good, and if she were only
good enough, Heaven would invent some way of reconciling all things—the
dignity of her father’s errors and the sweetness of her own confidence,
the strict performance of her filial duties and the enjoyment of Morris
Townsend’s affection.  Poor Catherine would have been glad to regard Mrs.
Penniman as an illuminating agent, a part which this lady herself indeed
was but imperfectly prepared to play.  Mrs. Penniman took too much
satisfaction in the sentimental shadows of this little drama to have, for
the moment, any great interest in dissipating them.  She wished the plot
to thicken, and the advice that she gave her niece tended, in her own
imagination, to produce this result.  It was rather incoherent counsel,
and from one day to another it contradicted itself; but it was pervaded
by an earnest desire that Catherine should do something striking.  “You
must _act_, my dear; in your situation the great thing is to act,” said
Mrs. Penniman, who found her niece altogether beneath her opportunities.
Mrs. Penniman’s real hope was that the girl would make a secret marriage,
at which she should officiate as brideswoman or duenna.  She had a vision
of this ceremony being performed in some subterranean chapel—subterranean
chapels in New York were not frequent, but Mrs. Penniman’s imagination
was not chilled by trifles—and of the guilty couple—she liked to think of
poor Catherine and her suitor as the guilty couple—being shuffled away in
a fast-whirling vehicle to some obscure lodging in the suburbs, where she
would pay them (in a thick veil) clandestine visits, where they would
endure a period of romantic privation, and where ultimately, after she
should have been their earthly providence, their intercessor, their
advocate, and their medium of communication with the world, they should
be reconciled to her brother in an artistic tableau, in which she herself
should be somehow the central figure.  She hesitated as yet to recommend
this course to Catherine, but she attempted to draw an attractive picture
of it to Morris Townsend.  She was in daily communication with the young
man, whom she kept informed by letters of the state of affairs in
Washington Square.  As he had been banished, as she said, from the house,
she no longer saw him; but she ended by writing to him that she longed
for an interview.  This interview could take place only on neutral
ground, and she bethought herself greatly before selecting a place of
meeting.  She had an inclination for Greenwood Cemetery, but she gave it
up as too distant; she could not absent herself for so long, as she said,
without exciting suspicion.  Then she thought of the Battery, but that
was rather cold and windy, besides one’s being exposed to intrusion from
the Irish emigrants who at this point alight, with large appetites, in
the New World and at last she fixed upon an oyster saloon in the Seventh
Avenue, kept by a negro—an establishment of which she knew nothing save
that she had noticed it in passing.  She made an appointment with Morris
Townsend to meet him there, and she went to the tryst at dusk, enveloped
in an impenetrable veil.  He kept her waiting for half an hour—he had
almost the whole width of the city to traverse—but she liked to wait, it
seemed to intensify the situation.  She ordered a cup of tea, which
proved excessively bad, and this gave her a sense that she was suffering
in a romantic cause.  When Morris at last arrived, they sat together for
half an hour in the duskiest corner of a back shop; and it is hardly too
much to say that this was the happiest half-hour that Mrs. Penniman had
known for years.  The situation was really thrilling, and it scarcely
seemed to her a false note when her companion asked for an oyster stew,
and proceeded to consume it before her eyes.  Morris, indeed, needed all
the satisfaction that stewed oysters could give him, for it may be
intimated to the reader that he regarded Mrs. Penniman in the light of a
fifth wheel to his coach.  He was in a state of irritation natural to a
gentleman of fine parts who had been snubbed in a benevolent attempt to
confer a distinction upon a young woman of inferior characteristics, and
the insinuating sympathy of this somewhat desiccated matron appeared to
offer him no practical relief.  He thought her a humbug, and he judged of
humbugs with a good deal of confidence.  He had listened and made himself
agreeable to her at first, in order to get a footing in Washington
Square; and at present he needed all his self-command to be decently
civil.  It would have gratified him to tell her that she was a fantastic
old woman, and that he should like to put her into an omnibus and send
her home.  We know, however, that Morris possessed the virtue of
self-control, and he had, moreover, the constant habit of seeking to be
agreeable; so that, although Mrs. Penniman’s demeanour only exasperated
his already unquiet nerves, he listened to her with a sombre deference in
which she found much to admire.


THEY had of course immediately spoken of Catherine.  “Did she send me a
message, or—or anything?” Morris asked.  He appeared to think that she
might have sent him a trinket or a lock of her hair.

“I am afraid she is not very excitable!”  And Morris gave a smile of some
bitterness.

“Oh, I hope it won’t come to that,” said Morris.

“Well,” rejoined Morris, “it is a fact that I wish to marry his daughter.
I met him with that the other day, but he was not at all vanquished.”

Mrs. Penniman was silent a little, and her smile beneath the shadow of
her capacious bonnet, on the edge of which her black veil was arranged
curtain-wise, fixed itself upon Morris’s face with a still more tender
brilliancy.  “Marry Catherine first and meet him afterwards!” she
exclaimed.

“Unfortunately Catherine and I have not Mr. Penniman to marry us,” said
Morris.

“The woman’s an idiot,” thought Morris; but he was obliged to say
something different.  It was not, however, materially more civil.  “Was
it in order to tell me this that you requested I would meet you here?”

Morris extended his empty hands with a melancholy smile.  “I am greatly
obliged to you, but I have nothing to send.”

Morris frowned again.  “Tell her to hold fast,” he said rather curtly.

“It does not concern me to know,” said Morris grandly.

“I despise it,” Morris declared.

Morris hesitated a moment; and then, as if he spoke advisedly—“I _do_
like the money!”

Morris raised his head a little, following this argument, “And what shall
I gain by that?”

“And seeing that I wish he would go to the deuce with it, he will leave
it to a hospital.  Is that what you mean?” asked Morris.

Morris shook his head, though it must be confessed he was a little struck
with this idea.  “Do you think he is so sentimental?”

There passed through Morris Townsend’s mind a rapid wonder as to what he
might, even under a remote contingency, be indebted to from the action of
this principle in Dr. Sloper’s breast, and the inquiry exhausted itself
in his sense of the ludicrous.  “Your brother has no duties to me,” he
said presently, “and I none to him.”

“It would sound harsh to say so!  I am so grateful for her love,” Morris
added.

Morris looked some moments at the sanded floor of the shop; he seemed to
be disposed to linger a moment.  At last, looking up with a certain
abruptness, “It is your belief that if she marries me he will cut her
off?” he asked.

“It doesn’t depend upon her, but upon you.  Venture to appear as
disinterested as you are!” said Mrs. Penniman ingeniously.  Morris
dropped his eyes on the sanded floor again, pondering this; and she
pursued.  “Mr. Penniman and I had nothing, and we were very happy.
Catherine, moreover, has her mother’s fortune, which, at the time my
sister-in-law married, was considered a very handsome one.”

“Oh, don’t speak of that!” said Morris; and, indeed, it was quite
superfluous, for he had contemplated the fact in all its lights.

“Ah! but your brother was a doctor,” Morris objected.

“I should think it an extremely loathsome profession,” said Morris, with
an air of intellectual independence.  Then in a moment, he went on rather
inconsequently, “Do you suppose there is a will already made in
Catherine’s favour?”

“Ah, but one can’t depend on that!” said Morris.

Morris blushed a little.  “Well, I am certainly afraid of being the cause
of an injury to Catherine.”

“How will you go home?” Morris asked, following this vehicle with an
interested eye.  Mrs. Penniman had taken his arm.

Morris started.  “Then I needn’t come walking round the Square to gaze at
it.”

“I don’t want to see them, ma’am!”  And Morris turned his back to the
house.

“Well, my dear, you will understand me some day!”  And Mrs. Penniman, who
was reading the evening paper, which she perused daily from the first
line to the last, resumed her occupation.  She wrapped herself in
silence; she was determined Catherine should ask her for an account of
her interview with Morris.  But Catherine was silent for so long, that
she almost lost patience; and she was on the point of remarking to her
that she was very heartless, when the girl at last spoke.

This tendency on Catherine’s part was presently even more apparent.  “You
had much better not make any more appointments with Mr. Townsend,” she
said.  “I don’t think it is right.”

Catherine had to admit this, and she did so in silence.  “I don’t believe
Mr. Townsend himself likes it,” she said at last.

“You told me that if I should have anything more to say about Mr.
Townsend you would be glad to listen to it.”

“Give me a proof of it, then; for it is beyond a question that by
engaging yourself to Morris Townsend you simply wait for my death.”

“I think Morris—little by little—might persuade you.”

“There is one thing you can tell Mr. Townsend when you see him again,” he
said: “that if you marry without my consent, I don’t leave you a farthing
of money.  That will interest him more than anything else you can tell
him.”

“My dear child,” the Doctor observed, laughing, “your simplicity is
touching.  Make that remark, in that tone, and with that expression of
countenance, to Mr. Townsend, and take a note of his answer.  It won’t be
polite—it will, express irritation; and I shall be glad of that, as it
will put me in the right; unless, indeed—which is perfectly possible—you
should like him the better for being rude to you.”

“Not at all.  Simply to advise you.  You have taken up young Townsend;
that’s your own affair.  I have nothing to do with your sentiments, your
fancies, your affections, your delusions; but what I request of you is
that you will keep these things to yourself.  I have explained my views
to Catherine; she understands them perfectly, and anything that she does
further in the way of encouraging Mr. Townsend’s attentions will be in
deliberate opposition to my wishes.  Anything that you should do in the
way of giving her aid and comfort will be—permit me the
expression—distinctly treasonable.  You know high treason is a capital
offence; take care how you incur the penalty.”

“Not like your sister’s brother!” cried Lavinia.  “My dear Lavinia,” said
the Doctor, “I sometimes wonder whether I am your brother.  We are so
extremely different.  In spite of differences, however, we can, at a
pinch, understand each other; and that is the essential thing just now.
Walk straight with regard to Mr. Townsend; that’s all I ask.  It is
highly probable you have been corresponding with him for the last three
weeks—perhaps even seeing him.  I don’t ask you—you needn’t tell me.”  He
had a moral conviction that she would contrive to tell a fib about the
matter, which it would disgust him to listen to.  “Whatever you have
done, stop doing it.  That’s all I wish.”

“Oh, Morris,” she cried, with a long tender murmur, “I never thought of
giving you up!”

This hypothetical optimism gave the poor girl a pang.  “No, Morris,” she
said solemnly, “he looks at it still in the same way.”

Morris watched her for a moment, attentively.  “Will you marry me
to-morrow?” he asked suddenly.

“Why, you must take me or leave me,” said Morris, very reasonably.  “You
can’t please your father and me both; you must choose between us.”

“Do you think it is in the least degree likely?” Morris asked.

“Strong?” cried Morris.  “I would rather you should think them weak.”

Morris turned away, walking to the window, where he stood looking out.
“You are terribly afraid of him!” he remarked at last.

This was much to the point, and Catherine was struck by it.  “I will try
not to be,” she said.  And she stood there submissively, the image, in
advance, of a dutiful and responsible wife.  This image could not fail to
recommend itself to Morris Townsend, and he continued to give proof of
the high estimation in which he held her.  It could only have been at the
prompting of such a sentiment that he presently mentioned to her that the
course recommended by Mrs. Penniman was an immediate union, regardless of
consequences.

“Yes, Aunt Penniman would like that,” Catherine said simply—and yet with
a certain shrewdness.  It must, however, have been in pure simplicity,
and from motives quite untouched by sarcasm, that, a few moments after,
she went on to say to Morris that her father had given her a message for
him.  It was quite on her conscience to deliver this message, and had the
mission been ten times more painful she would have as scrupulously
performed it.  “He told me to tell you—to tell you very distinctly, and
directly from himself, that if I marry without his consent, I shall not
inherit a penny of his fortune.  He made a great point of this.  He
seemed to think—he seemed to think—”

Morris was silent a while.  “He was very positive about this, was he?” he
asked at last.  “He thought such a message would annoy me terribly, and
make me throw off the mask, eh?”

“Please tell him that I care for his message as much as for that!”  And
Morris snapped his fingers sonorously.

“Do you know you sometimes disappoint me?” said Morris.

“Yes, Morris,” said the girl, with her imagination—what there was of
it—swimming in this happy truth, which seemed, after all, invidious to no
one.

This idea, sharply expressed by Morris’s handsome lips, renewed for a
moment, to the poor girl’s temporarily pacified conscience, all its
dreadful vividness.  “Oh, you must love me very much!” she cried.

“I suppose it seems to you a kind of curse,” said Morris.  “It must be
very dismal.  But don’t you think,” he went on presently, “that if you
were to try to be very clever, and to set rightly about it, you might in
the end conjure it away?  Don’t you think,” he continued further, in a
tone of sympathetic speculation, “that a really clever woman, in your
place, might bring him round at last?  Don’t you think?”

Here, suddenly, Morris was interrupted; these ingenious inquiries had not
reached Catherine’s ears.  The terrible word “disinheritance,” with all
its impressive moral reprobation, was still ringing there; seemed indeed
to gather force as it lingered.  The mortal chill of her situation struck
more deeply into her child-like heart, and she was overwhelmed by a
feeling of loneliness and danger.  But her refuge was there, close to
her, and she put out her hands to grasp it.  “Ah, Morris,” she said, with
a shudder, “I will marry you as soon as you please.”  And she surrendered
herself, leaning her head on his shoulder.

“I need to be with all this hot blood about me.  Young Townsend indeed is
cool; I must allow him that merit.”

Mrs. Penniman, meanwhile, lost little time in putting herself again in
communication with Morris Townsend.  She requested him to favour her with
another interview, but she did not on this occasion select an oyster
saloon as the scene of their meeting.  She proposed that he should join
her at the door of a certain church, after service on Sunday afternoon,
and she was careful not to appoint the place of worship which she usually
visited, and where, as she said, the congregation would have spied upon
her.  She picked out a less elegant resort, and on issuing from its
portal at the hour she had fixed she saw the young man standing apart.
She offered him no recognition till she had crossed the street and he had
followed her to some distance.  Here, with a smile—“Excuse my apparent
want of cordiality,” she said.  “You know what to believe about that.
Prudence before everything.”  And on his asking her in what direction
they should walk, “Where we shall be least observed,” she murmured.

Morris was not in high good-humour, and his response to this speech was
not particularly gallant.  “I don’t flatter myself we shall be much
observed anywhere.”  Then he turned recklessly toward the centre of the
town.  “I hope you have come to tell me that he has knocked under,” he
went on.

“I am afraid I am not altogether a harbinger of good; and yet, too, I am
to a certain extent a messenger of peace.  I have been thinking a great
deal, Mr. Townsend,” said Mrs. Penniman.

“Well, let’s have it,” said Morris.

“I recommend you to take one way and stick to it,” Morris replied.

“A capital friend who gives bad advice!” said Morris.

“Wait, at any rate, till he is less violent.  Bide your time, Mr.
Townsend; remember the prize is great!”

“Mr. Townsend,” she proceeded, “shall I tell you something?  Catherine
loves you so much that you may do anything.”

Morris stood there still, with his raised eyebrows; then he said simply
and rather dryly—“Ah!”  After this he remarked to Mrs. Penniman that if
she walked so slowly she would attract notice, and he succeeded, after a
fashion, in hurrying her back to the domicile of which her tenure had
become so insecure.


HE had slightly misrepresented the matter in saying that Catherine had
consented to take the great step.  We left her just now declaring that
she would burn her ships behind her; but Morris, after having elicited
this declaration, had become conscious of good reasons for not taking it
up.  He avoided, gracefully enough, fixing a day, though he left her
under the impression that he had his eye on one.  Catherine may have had
her difficulties; but those of her circumspect suitor are also worthy of
consideration.  The prize was certainly great; but it was only to be won
by striking the happy mean between precipitancy and caution.  It would be
all very well to take one’s jump and trust to Providence; Providence was
more especially on the side of clever people, and clever people were
known by an indisposition to risk their bones.  The ultimate reward of a
union with a young woman who was both unattractive and impoverished ought
to be connected with immediate disadvantages by some very palpable chain.
Between the fear of losing Catherine and her possible fortune altogether,
and the fear of taking her too soon and finding this possible fortune as
void of actuality as a collection of emptied bottles, it was not
comfortable for Morris Townsend to choose; a fact that should be
remembered by readers disposed to judge harshly of a young man who may
have struck them as making but an indifferently successful use of fine
natural parts.  He had not forgotten that in any event Catherine had her
own ten thousand a year; he had devoted an abundance of meditation to
this circumstance.  But with his fine parts he rated himself high, and he
had a perfectly definite appreciation of his value, which seemed to him
inadequately represented by the sum I have mentioned.  At the same time
he reminded himself that this sum was considerable, that everything is
relative, and that if a modest income is less desirable than a large one,
the complete absence of revenue is nowhere accounted an advantage.  These
reflexions gave him plenty of occupation, and made it necessary that he
should trim his sail.  Dr. Sloper’s opposition was the unknown quantity
in the problem he had to work out.  The natural way to work it out was by
marrying Catherine; but in mathematics there are many short cuts, and
Morris was not without a hope that he should yet discover one.  When
Catherine took him at his word and consented to renounce the attempt to
mollify her father, he drew back skilfully enough, as I have said, and
kept the wedding-day still an open question.  Her faith in his sincerity
was so complete that she was incapable of suspecting that he was playing
with her; her trouble just now was of another kind.  The poor girl had an
admirable sense of honour; and from the moment she had brought herself to
the point of violating her father’s wish, it seemed to her that she had
no right to enjoy his protection.  It was on her conscience that she
ought to live under his roof only so long as she conformed to his wisdom.
There was a great deal of glory in such a position, but poor Catherine
felt that she had forfeited her claim to it.  She had cast her lot with a
young man against whom he had solemnly warned her, and broken the
contract under which he provided her with a happy home.  She could not
give up the young man, so she must leave the home; and the sooner the
object of her preference offered her another the sooner her situation
would lose its awkward twist.  This was close reasoning; but it was
commingled with an infinite amount of merely instinctive penitence.
Catherine’s days at this time were dismal, and the weight of some of her
hours was almost more than she could bear.  Her father never looked at
her, never spoke to her.  He knew perfectly what he was about, and this
was part of a plan.  She looked at him as much as she dared (for she was
afraid of seeming to offer herself to his observation), and she pitied
him for the sorrow she had brought upon him.  She held up her head and
busied her hands, and went about her daily occupations; and when the
state of things in Washington Square seemed intolerable, she closed her
eyes and indulged herself with an intellectual vision of the man for
whose sake she had broken a sacred law.  Mrs. Penniman, of the three
persons in Washington Square, had much the most of the manner that
belongs to a great crisis.  If Catherine was quiet, she was quietly
quiet, as I may say, and her pathetic effects, which there was no one to
notice, were entirely unstudied and unintended.  If the Doctor was stiff
and dry and absolutely indifferent to the presence of his companions, it
was so lightly, neatly, easily done, that you would have had to know him
well to discover that, on the whole, he rather enjoyed having to be so
disagreeable.  But Mrs. Penniman was elaborately reserved and
significantly silent; there was a richer rustle in the very deliberate
movements to which she confined herself, and when she occasionally spoke,
in connexion with some very trivial event, she had the air of meaning
something deeper than what she said.  Between Catherine and her father
nothing had passed since the evening she went to speak to him in his
study.  She had something to say to him—it seemed to her she ought to say
it; but she kept it back, for fear of irritating him.  He also had
something to say to her; but he was determined not to speak first.  He
was interested, as we know, in seeing how, if she were left to herself,
she would “stick.”  At last she told him she had seen Morris Townsend
again, and that their relations remained quite the same.

It gave her such delight, after his words of the day before, to hear that
he should “like” her to do something, and that he still had in his heart
any of the tenderness of preference, that she gave a little exclamation
of joy.  But then she became conscious that Morris was not included in
this proposal, and that—as regards really going—she would greatly prefer
to remain at home with him.  But she blushed, none the less, more
comfortably than she had done of late.  “It would be delightful to go to
Europe,” she remarked, with a sense that the idea was not original, and
that her tone was not all it might be.

“I had better tell Mr. Townsend,” said Catherine.

This striking argument gave the Doctor a sudden sense of having
underestimated his daughter; it seemed even more than worthy of a young
woman who had revealed the quality of unaggressive obstinacy.  But it
displeased him—displeased him deeply, and he signified as much.  “That
idea is in very bad taste,” he said.  “Did you get it from Mr. Townsend?”


IF Morris Townsend was not to be included in this journey, no more was
Mrs. Penniman, who would have been thankful for an invitation, but who
(to do her justice) bore her disappointment in a perfectly ladylike
manner.  “I should enjoy seeing the works of Raphael and the ruins—the
ruins of the Pantheon,” she said to Mrs. Almond; “but, on the other hand,
I shall not be sorry to be alone and at peace for the next few months in
Washington Square.  I want rest; I have been through so much in the last
four months.”  Mrs. Almond thought it rather cruel that her brother
should not take poor Lavinia abroad; but she easily understood that, if
the purpose of his expedition was to make Catherine forget her lover, it
was not in his interest to give his daughter this young man’s best friend
as a companion.  “If Lavinia had not been so foolish, she might visit the
ruins of the Pantheon,” she said to herself; and she continued to regret
her sister’s folly, even though the latter assured her that she had often
heard the relics in question most satisfactorily described by Mr.
Penniman.  Mrs. Penniman was perfectly aware that her brother’s motive in
undertaking a foreign tour was to lay a trap for Catherine’s constancy;
and she imparted this conviction very frankly to her niece.

“He thinks it will make you forget Morris,” she said (she always called
the young man “Morris” now); “out of sight, out of mind, you know.  He
thinks that all the things you will see over there will drive him out of
your thoughts.”

“Oh no, Morris!” said Catherine, quite deprecatingly.

“Gracious Heaven, what a dull woman!” Morris exclaimed to himself.

Morris gave a little laugh.  “Yes, I verily believe that your poor father
will be disappointed!  But you will have seen Europe,” he added
humorously.  “What a take-in!”

“Doesn’t he want to deceive you?” cried Morris.  “It will serve him
right!  I really think you had better go.”

“Be married when you come back.  You can buy your wedding clothes in
Paris.”  And then Morris, with great kindness of tone, explained his view
of the matter.  It would be a good thing that she should go; it would put
them completely in the right.  It would show they were reasonable and
willing to wait.  Once they were so sure of each other, they could afford
to wait—what had they to fear?  If there was a particle of chance that
her father would be favourably affected by her going, that ought to
settle it; for, after all, Morris was very unwilling to be the cause of
her being disinherited.  It was not for himself, it was for her and for
her children.  He was willing to wait for her; it would be hard, but he
could do it.  And over there, among beautiful scenes and noble monuments,
perhaps the old gentleman would be softened; such things were supposed to
exert a humanising influence.  He might be touched by her gentleness, her
patience, her willingness to make any sacrifice but _that_ one; and if
she should appeal to him some day, in some celebrated spot—in Italy, say,
in the evening; in Venice, in a gondola, by moonlight—if she should be a
little clever about it and touch the right chord, perhaps he would fold
her in his arms and tell her that he forgave her.  Catherine was
immensely struck with this conception of the affair, which seemed
eminently worthy of her lover’s brilliant intellect; though she viewed it
askance in so far as it depended upon her own powers of execution.  The
idea of being “clever” in a gondola by moonlight appeared to her to
involve elements of which her grasp was not active.  But it was settled
between them that she should tell her father that she was ready to follow
him obediently anywhere, making the mental reservation that she loved
Morris Townsend more than ever.

“The same—only more so!” said Morris, smiling.


THE Doctor, during the first six months he was abroad, never spoke to his
daughter of their little difference; partly on system, and partly because
he had a great many other things to think about.  It was idle to attempt
to ascertain the state of her affections without direct inquiry, because,
if she had not had an expressive manner among the familiar influences of
home, she failed to gather animation from the mountains of Switzerland or
the monuments of Italy.  She was always her father’s docile and
reasonable associate—going through their sight-seeing in deferential
silence, never complaining of fatigue, always ready to start at the hour
he had appointed over-night, making no foolish criticisms and indulging
in no refinements of appreciation.  “She is about as intelligent as the
bundle of shawls,” the Doctor said; her main superiority being that while
the bundle of shawls sometimes got lost, or tumbled out of the carriage,
Catherine was always at her post, and had a firm and ample seat.  But her
father had expected this, and he was not constrained to set down her
intellectual limitations as a tourist to sentimental depression; she had
completely divested herself of the characteristics of a victim, and
during the whole time that they were abroad she never uttered an audible
sigh.  He supposed she was in correspondence with Morris Townsend; but he
held his peace about it, for he never saw the young man’s letters, and
Catherine’s own missives were always given to the courier to post.  She
heard from her lover with considerable regularity, but his letters came
enclosed in Mrs. Penniman’s; so that whenever the Doctor handed her a
packet addressed in his sister’s hand, he was an involuntary instrument
of the passion he condemned.  Catherine made this reflexion, and six
months earlier she would have felt bound to give him warning; but now she
deemed herself absolved.  There was a sore spot in her heart that his own
words had made when once she spoke to him as she thought honour prompted;
she would try and please him as far as she could, but she would never
speak that way again.  She read her lover’s letters in secret.

He would not touch her, but he had touched Morris.  The warmth came back
to her heart.  “That is not true, father,” she broke out, “and you ought
not to say it!  It is not right, and it’s not true!”

“Do you mean about Mr. Townsend?”

“About Mr. Townsend.”


THE voyage was indeed uncomfortable, and Catherine, on arriving in New
York, had not the compensation of “going off,” in her father’s phrase,
with Morris Townsend.  She saw him, however, the day after she landed;
and, in the meantime, he formed a natural subject of conversation between
our heroine and her Aunt Lavinia, with whom, the night she disembarked,
the girl was closeted for a long time before either lady retired to rest.

Catherine was silent a moment.  This idea was disagreeable to her, and
she was reminded again, with pain, of her aunt’s secretive habits.
Morris, the reader may be informed, had had the tact not to tell her that
he sat in her father’s study.  He had known her but for a few months, and
her aunt had known her for fifteen years; and yet he would not have made
the mistake of thinking that Catherine would see the joke of the thing.
“I am sorry you made him go into father’s room,” she said, after a while.

“Morris told me all about it.  The idea of turning the tables on him, in
Europe; of watching him, when he was agreeably impressed by some
celebrated sight—he pretends to be so artistic, you know—and then just
pleading with him and bringing him round.”

“I never tried it.  It was Morris’s idea; but if he had been with us, in
Europe, he would have seen that father was never impressed in that way.
He _is_ artistic—tremendously artistic; but the more celebrated places we
visited, and the more he admired them, the less use it would have been to
plead with him.  They seemed only to make him more determined—more
terrible,” said poor Catherine.  “I shall never bring him round, and I
expect nothing now.”

“He cares for it for my sake, because he doesn’t want to injure me.  But
he will know—he knows already—how little he need be afraid about that.
Besides,” said Catherine, “I have got plenty of money of my own.  We
shall be very well off; and now hasn’t he got his business?  I am
delighted about that business.”  She went on talking, showing a good deal
of excitement as she proceeded.  Her aunt had never seen her with just
this manner, and Mrs. Penniman, observing her, set it down to foreign
travel, which had made her more positive, more mature.  She thought also
that Catherine had improved in appearance; she looked rather handsome.
Mrs. Penniman wondered whether Morris Townsend would be struck with that.
While she was engaged in this speculation, Catherine broke out, with a
certain sharpness, “Why are you so contradictory, Aunt Penniman?  You
seem to think one thing at one time, and another at another.  A year ago,
before I went away, you wished me not to mind about displeasing father;
and now you seem to recommend me to take another line.  You change about
so.”

Morris sat looking and smiling.  “My poor dear girl!” he exclaimed.

Morris continued to smile, and then he got up and walked about again.
“You had better let me try him!”

“Brilliantly, and we shall certainly be very comfortable.  But it isn’t
of the mere material comfort I speak; it is of the moral comfort,” said
Morris—“of the intellectual satisfaction!”

He stood before her with his bright face, his jaunty air, his hands in
his pockets; and she got up, with her eyes resting on his own.  “Please
don’t, Morris; please don’t,” she said; and there was a certain mild, sad
firmness in her tone which he heard for the first time.  “We must ask no
favours of him—we must ask nothing more.  He won’t relent, and nothing
good will come of it.  I know it now—I have a very good reason.”

“Oh, bother!” cried Morris angrily.

“‘Simply?’” cried Morris, with a laugh, “I am much obliged for that!”

“Upon my word,” said Morris, “you are a queer family!”

“Don’t say that—don’t say anything unkind,” the girl entreated.  “You
must be very kind to me now, because, Morris—because,” and she hesitated
a moment—“because I have done a great deal for you.”

“As if they despised you!” said Catherine passionately.  “He spoke that
way the night before we sailed.  It wasn’t much, but it was enough, and I
thought of it on the voyage, all the time.  Then I made up my mind.  I
will never ask him for anything again, or expect anything from him.  It
would not be natural now.  We must be very happy together, and we must
not seem to depend upon his forgiveness.  And Morris, Morris, you must
never despise me!”

“I have no doubt you have seen a great deal of Mr. Townsend, and done
your best to console him for Catherine’s absence,” he said.  “I don’t ask
you, and you needn’t deny it.  I wouldn’t put the question to you for the
world, and expose you to the inconvenience of having to—a—excogitate an
answer.  No one has betrayed you, and there has been no spy upon your
proceedings.  Elizabeth has told no tales, and has never mentioned you
except to praise your good looks and good spirits.  The thing is simply
an inference of my own—an induction, as the philosophers say.  It seems
to me likely that you would have offered an asylum to an interesting
sufferer.  Mr. Townsend has been a good deal in the house; there is
something in the house that tells me so.  We doctors, you know, end by
acquiring fine perceptions, and it is impressed upon my sensorium that he
has sat in these chairs, in a very easy attitude, and warmed himself at
that fire.  I don’t grudge him the comfort of it; it is the only one he
will ever enjoy at my expense.  It seems likely, indeed, that I shall be
able to economise at his own.  I don’t know what you may have said to
him, or what you may say hereafter; but I should like you to know that if
you have encouraged him to believe that he will gain anything by hanging
on, or that I have budged a hair’s-breadth from the position I took up a
year ago, you have played him a trick for which he may exact reparation.
I’m not sure that he may not bring a suit against you.  Of course you
have done it conscientiously; you have made yourself believe that I can
be tired out.  This is the most baseless hallucination that ever visited
the brain of a genial optimist.  I am not in the least tired; I am as
fresh as when I started; I am good for fifty years yet.  Catherine
appears not to have budged an inch either; she is equally fresh; so we
are about where we were before.  This, however, you know as well as I.
What I wish is simply to give you notice of my own state of mind!  Take
it to heart, dear Lavinia.  Beware of the just resentment of a deluded
fortune-hunter!”

“Don’t undervalue irony, it is often of great use.  It is not, however,
always necessary, and I will show you how gracefully I can lay it aside.
I should like to know whether you think Morris Townsend will hang on.”

“She has not given up Mr. Townsend,” said Mrs. Almond.  “I saw that in
the first half minute.  She has come home exactly the same.”

In spite of the suggestion about the reticule, Morris appeared to think
poorly of the plan, for he gave Mrs. Penniman no encouragement whatever
to visit his office, which he had already represented to her as a place
peculiarly and unnaturally difficult to find.  But as she persisted in
desiring an interview—up to the last, after months of intimate colloquy,
she called these meetings “interviews”—he agreed that they should take a
walk together, and was even kind enough to leave his office for this
purpose, during the hours at which business might have been supposed to
be liveliest.  It was no surprise to him, when they met at a street
corner, in a region of empty lots and undeveloped pavements (Mrs.
Penniman being attired as much as possible like a “woman of the people”),
to find that, in spite of her urgency, what she chiefly had to convey to
him was the assurance of her sympathy.  Of such assurances, however, he
had already a voluminous collection, and it would not have been worth his
while to forsake a fruitful avocation merely to hear Mrs. Penniman say,
for the thousandth time, that she had made his cause her own.  Morris had
something of his own to say.  It was not an easy thing to bring out, and
while he turned it over the difficulty made him acrimonious.

“I will bring a lawsuit against _you_,” said Morris, “if you ask me any
more such aggravating questions.  A man should know when he is beaten,”
he added, in a moment.  “I must give her up!”

Mrs. Penniman received this declaration in silence, though it made her
heart beat a little.  It found her by no means unprepared, for she had
accustomed herself to the thought that, if Morris should decidedly not be
able to get her brother’s money, it would not do for him to marry
Catherine without it.  “It would not do” was a vague way of putting the
thing; but Mrs. Penniman’s natural affection completed the idea, which,
though it had not as yet been so crudely expressed between them as in the
form that Morris had just given it, had nevertheless been implied so
often, in certain easy intervals of talk, as he sat stretching his legs
in the Doctor’s well-stuffed armchairs, that she had grown first to
regard it with an emotion which she flattered herself was philosophic,
and then to have a secret tenderness for it.  The fact that she kept her
tenderness secret proves, of course, that she was ashamed of it; but she
managed to blink her shame by reminding herself that she was, after all,
the official protector of her niece’s marriage.  Her logic would scarcely
have passed muster with the Doctor.  In the first place, Morris _must_
get the money, and she would help him to it.  In the second, it was plain
it would never come to him, and it would be a grievous pity he should
marry without it—a young man who might so easily find something better.
After her brother had delivered himself, on his return from Europe, of
that incisive little address that has been quoted, Morris’s cause seemed
so hopeless that Mrs. Penniman fixed her attention exclusively upon the
latter branch of her argument.  If Morris had been her son, she would
certainly have sacrificed Catherine to a superior conception of his
future; and to be ready to do so as the case stood was therefore even a
finer degree of devotion.  Nevertheless, it checked her breath a little
to have the sacrificial knife, as it were, suddenly thrust into her hand.

Morris walked along a moment, and then he repeated harshly: “I must give
her up!”

“My poor Morris, do you know how much she loves you?”

“Be my friend _now_!”  And Morris walked on.

“It may turn out better than you think.  Catherine is, after all, so very
peculiar.”  And she thought she might take it upon herself to assure him
that, whatever happened, the girl would be very quiet—she wouldn’t make a
noise.  They extended their walk, and, while they proceeded, Mrs.
Penniman took upon herself other things besides, and ended by having
assumed a considerable burden; Morris being ready enough, as may be
imagined, to put everything off upon her.  But he was not for a single
instant the dupe of her blundering alacrity; he knew that of what she
promised she was competent to perform but an insignificant fraction, and
the more she professed her willingness to serve him, the greater fool he
thought her.

“Something brilliant,” said Morris.  “Shouldn’t you like me to do
something brilliant?”

Morris greeted this question with a reflexion which was hardly the less
impudent from being inaudible.  “Surely, women are more crude than men!”
And then he answered audibly:

“I give her up, not for another woman, but for a wider career!” Morris
announced.

“Are you sick?” she asked of Morris.  “You seem so restless, and you look
pale.”

“I am not at all well,” said Morris; and it occurred to him that, if he
could only make her pity him enough, he might get off.

“I am too proud,” said Morris.

“You know people talk tremendously about a man’s marrying a rich girl,”
Morris remarked.  “It’s excessively disagreeable.”

Morris attempted a natural smile.  “There are some things which we can’t
very well bear together—for instance, separation.”

“Where are you going, Morris?” she suddenly asked.

“All women do!” said Morris, with the tone of large experience.

“I don’t earn my living with you,” said Morris.  “Or rather,” he cried
with a sudden inspiration, “that’s just what I do—or what the world says
I do!”

“Do you suppose I would take you to a nest of yellow fever?” cried
Morris.  “Do you suppose I would expose you at such a time as this?”

“If there is yellow fever, why should you go?  Morris, you must not go!”

“It is to make six thousand dollars,” said Morris.  “Do you grudge me
that satisfaction?”

“You said you wouldn’t make a scene!” cried Morris.  “I call this a
scene.”

Morris bethought himself a little.  “Very well, then; we won’t talk about
it any more.  I will transact my business by letter.”  And he began to
smooth his hat, as if to take leave.

“Do you want to make conditions?” Morris asked.  “I will come next
Saturday.”

Morris bent his head and kissed her forehead.  “When you are quiet, you
are perfection,” he said; “but when you are violent, you are not in
character.”

“I said Saturday!” Morris answered, smiling.  He tried a frown at one
moment, a smile at another; he was at his wit’s end.

“I am a busy man—I am not a dangler!” cried Morris sternly.

His voice was so hard and unnatural that, with a helpless look at him,
she turned away; and then he quickly laid his hand on the door-knob.  He
felt as if he were absolutely running away from her.  But in an instant
she was close to him again, and murmuring in a tone none the less
penetrating for being low, “Morris, you are going to leave me.”

“I shall never be reasonable in that way!”  And she tried to keep him
longer; it was almost a struggle.  “Think of what I have done!” she broke
out.  “Morris, I have given up everything!”

“I will write to you—that is better,” Morris stammered.

In this way the girl delivered herself, and from hour to hour kept her
aunt at bay.  From hour to hour Mrs. Penniman’s curiosity grew.  She
would have given her little finger to know what Morris had said and done,
what tone he had taken, what pretext he had found.  She wrote to him,
naturally, to request an interview; but she received, as naturally, no
answer to her petition.  Morris was not in a writing mood; for Catherine
had addressed him two short notes which met with no acknowledgment.
These notes were so brief that I may give them entire.  “Won’t you give
me some sign that you didn’t mean to be so cruel as you seemed on
Tuesday?”—that was the first; the other was a little longer.  “If I was
unreasonable or suspicious on Tuesday—if I annoyed you or troubled you in
any way—I beg your forgiveness, and I promise never again to be so
foolish.  I am punished enough, and I don’t understand.  Dear Morris, you
are killing me!”  These notes were despatched on the Friday and Saturday;
but Saturday and Sunday passed without bringing the poor girl the
satisfaction she desired.  Her punishment accumulated; she continued to
bear it, however, with a good deal of superficial fortitude.  On Saturday
morning the Doctor, who had been watching in silence, spoke to his sister
Lavinia.

“Ah, but Mr. Townsend’s have,” her aunt answered very gently.

It was the first time Mrs. Penniman had heard of New Orleans in this
connexion; but she was averse to letting Catherine know that she was in
the dark.  She attempted to strike an illumination from the instructions
she had received from Morris.  “My dear Catherine,” she said, “when a
separation has been agreed upon, the farther he goes away the better.”

Mrs. Penniman was scared and bewildered; she saw no prospect of
introducing her little account of the purity of Morris’s motives.  “You
are a most ungrateful girl!” she cried.  “Do you scold me for talking
with him?  I am sure we never talked of anything but you!”

She could not have said this two days later—for instance, on Tuesday,
when she at last received a letter from Morris Townsend.  It was an
epistle of considerable length, measuring five large square pages, and
written at Philadelphia.  It was an explanatory document, and it
explained a great many things, chief among which were the considerations
that had led the writer to take advantage of an urgent “professional”
absence to try and banish from his mind the image of one whose path he
had crossed only to scatter it with ruins.  He ventured to expect but
partial success in this attempt, but he could promise her that, whatever
his failure, he would never again interpose between her generous heart
and her brilliant prospects and filial duties.  He closed with an
intimation that his professional pursuits might compel him to travel for
some months, and with the hope that when they should each have
accommodated themselves to what was sternly involved in their respective
positions—even should this result not be reached for years—they should
meet as friends, as fellow-sufferers, as innocent but philosophic victims
of a great social law.  That her life should be peaceful and happy was
the dearest wish of him who ventured still to subscribe himself her most
obedient servant.  The letter was beautifully written, and Catherine, who
kept it for many years after this, was able, when her sense of the
bitterness of its meaning and the hollowness of its tone had grown less
acute, to admire its grace of expression.  At present, for a long time
after she received it, all she had to help her was the determination,
daily more rigid, to make no appeal to the compassion of her father.


OUR story has hitherto moved with very short steps, but as it approaches
its termination it must take a long stride.  As time went on, it might
have appeared to the Doctor that his daughter’s account of her rupture
with Morris Townsend, mere bravado as he had deemed it, was in some
degree justified by the sequel.  Morris remained as rigidly and
unremittingly absent as if he had died of a broken heart, and Catherine
had apparently buried the memory of this fruitless episode as deep as if
it had terminated by her own choice.  We know that she had been deeply
and incurably wounded, but the Doctor had no means of knowing it.  He was
certainly curious about it, and would have given a good deal to discover
the exact truth; but it was his punishment that he never knew—his
punishment, I mean, for the abuse of sarcasm in his relations with his
daughter.  There was a good deal of effective sarcasm in her keeping him
in the dark, and the rest of the world conspired with her, in this sense,
to be sarcastic.  Mrs. Penniman told him nothing, partly because he never
questioned her—he made too light of Mrs. Penniman for that—and partly
because she flattered herself that a tormenting reserve, and a serene
profession of ignorance, would avenge her for his theory that she had
meddled in the matter.  He went two or three times to see Mrs.
Montgomery, but Mrs. Montgomery had nothing to impart.  She simply knew
that her brother’s engagement was broken off, and now that Miss Sloper
was out of danger she preferred not to bear witness in any way against
Morris.  She had done so before—however unwillingly—because she was sorry
for Miss Sloper; but she was not sorry for Miss Sloper now—not at all
sorry.  Morris had told her nothing about his relations with Miss Sloper
at the time, and he had told her nothing since.  He was always away, and
he very seldom wrote to her; she believed he had gone to California.
Mrs. Almond had, in her sister’s phrase, “taken up” Catherine violently
since the recent catastrophe; but though the girl was very grateful to
her for her kindness, she revealed no secrets, and the good lady could
give the Doctor no satisfaction.  Even, however, had she been able to
narrate to him the private history of his daughter’s unhappy love affair,
it would have given her a certain comfort to leave him in ignorance; for
Mrs. Almond was at this time not altogether in sympathy with her brother.
She had guessed for herself that Catherine had been cruelly jilted—she
knew nothing from Mrs. Penniman, for Mrs. Penniman had not ventured to
lay the famous explanation of Morris’s motives before Mrs. Almond, though
she had thought it good enough for Catherine—and she pronounced her
brother too consistently indifferent to what the poor creature must have
suffered and must still be suffering.  Dr. Sloper had his theory, and he
rarely altered his theories.  The marriage would have been an abominable
one, and the girl had had a blessed escape.  She was not to be pitied for
that, and to pretend to condole with her would have been to make
concessions to the idea that she had ever had a right to think of Morris.

“If your leg is a metaphor for young Townsend, I can assure you he has
never been crushed.  Crushed?  Not he!  He is alive and perfectly intact,
and that’s why I am not satisfied.”

The Doctor’s idea that the thing was a “blind” had its intermissions and
revivals; but it may be said on the whole to have increased as he grew
older; together with his impression of Catherine’s blooming and
comfortable condition.  Naturally, if he had not found grounds for
viewing her as a lovelorn maiden during the year or two that followed her
great trouble, he found none at a time when she had completely recovered
her self-possession.  He was obliged to recognise the fact that if the
two young people were waiting for him to get out of the way, they were at
least waiting very patiently.  He had heard from time to time that Morris
was in New York; but he never remained there long, and, to the best of
the Doctor’s belief, had no communication with Catherine.  He was sure
they never met, and he had reason to suspect that Morris never wrote to
her.  After the letter that has been mentioned, she heard from him twice
again, at considerable intervals; but on none of these occasions did she
write herself.  On the other hand, as the Doctor observed, she averted
herself rigidly from the idea of marrying other people.  Her
opportunities for doing so were not numerous, but they occurred often
enough to test her disposition.  She refused a widower, a man with a
genial temperament, a handsome fortune, and three little girls (he had
heard that she was very fond of children, and he pointed to his own with
some confidence); and she turned a deaf ear to the solicitations of a
clever young lawyer, who, with the prospect of a great practice, and the
reputation of a most agreeable man, had had the shrewdness, when he came
to look about him for a wife, to believe that she would suit him better
than several younger and prettier girls.  Mr. Macalister, the widower,
had desired to make a marriage of reason, and had chosen Catherine for
what he supposed to be her latent matronly qualities; but John Ludlow,
who was a year the girl’s junior, and spoken of always as a young man who
might have his “pick,” was seriously in love with her.  Catherine,
however, would never look at him; she made it plain to him that she
thought he came to see her too often.  He afterwards consoled himself,
and married a very different person, little Miss Sturtevant, whose
attractions were obvious to the dullest comprehension.  Catherine, at the
time of these events, had left her thirtieth year well behind her, and
had quite taken her place as an old maid.  Her father would have
preferred she should marry, and he once told her that he hoped she would
not be too fastidious.  “I should like to see you an honest man’s wife
before I die,” he said.  This was after John Ludlow had been compelled to
give it up, though the Doctor had advised him to persevere.  The Doctor
exercised no further pressure, and had the credit of not “worrying” at
all over his daughter’s singleness.  In fact he worried rather more than
appeared, and there were considerable periods during which he felt sure
that Morris Townsend was hidden behind some door.  “If he is not, why
doesn’t she marry?” he asked himself.  “Limited as her intelligence may
be, she must understand perfectly well that she is made to do the usual
thing.”  Catherine, however, became an admirable old maid.  She formed
habits, regulated her days upon a system of her own, interested herself
in charitable institutions, asylums, hospitals, and aid societies; and
went generally, with an even and noiseless step, about the rigid business
of her life.  This life had, however, a secret history as well as a
public one—if I may talk of the public history of a mature and diffident
spinster for whom publicity had always a combination of terrors.  From
her own point of view the great facts of her career were that Morris
Townsend had trifled with her affection, and that her father had broken
its spring.  Nothing could ever alter these facts; they were always
there, like her name, her age, her plain face.  Nothing could ever undo
the wrong or cure the pain that Morris had inflicted on her, and nothing
could ever make her feel towards her father as she felt in her younger
years.  There was something dead in her life, and her duty was to try and
fill the void.  Catherine recognised this duty to the utmost; she had a
great disapproval of brooding and moping.  She had, of course, no faculty
for quenching memory in dissipation; but she mingled freely in the usual
gaieties of the town, and she became at last an inevitable figure at all
respectable entertainments.  She was greatly liked, and as time went on
she grew to be a sort of kindly maiden aunt to the younger portion of
society.  Young girls were apt to confide to her their love affairs
(which they never did to Mrs. Penniman), and young men to be fond of her
without knowing why.  She developed a few harmless eccentricities; her
habits, once formed, were rather stiffly maintained; her opinions, on all
moral and social matters, were extremely conservative; and before she was
forty she was regarded as an old-fashioned person, and an authority on
customs that had passed away.  Mrs. Penniman, in comparison, was quite a
girlish figure; she grew younger as she advanced in life.  She lost none
of her relish for beauty and mystery, but she had little opportunity to
exercise it.  With Catherine’s later wooers she failed to establish
relations as intimate as those which had given her so many interesting
hours in the society of Morris Townsend.  These gentlemen had an
indefinable mistrust of her good offices, and they never talked to her
about Catherine’s charms.  Her ringlets, her buckles and bangles,
glistened more brightly with each succeeding year, and she remained quite
the same officious and imaginative Mrs. Penniman, and the odd mixture of
impetuosity and circumspection, that we have hitherto known.  As regards
one point, however, her circumspection prevailed, and she must be given
due credit for it.  For upwards of seventeen years she never mentioned
Morris Townsend’s name to her niece.  Catherine was grateful to her, but
this consistent silence, so little in accord with her aunt’s character,
gave her a certain alarm, and she could never wholly rid herself of a
suspicion that Mrs. Penniman sometimes had news of him.

“I hope I shall!  But some day I shall take a bad cold, and then it will
not matter much what any one hopes.  That will be the manner of my exit,
and when it takes place, remember I told you so.  Promise me not to marry
Morris Townsend after I am gone.”

“Fat and bald”: these words presented a strange image to Catherine’s
mind, out of which the memory of the most beautiful young man in the
world had never faded.  “I don’t think you understand,” she said.  “I
very seldom think of Mr. Townsend.”

“Well, then, I have seen Morris Townsend.”

“I met him at Marian’s,” said Mrs. Penniman.  “He goes to Marian’s, and
they are so afraid you will meet him there.  It’s my belief that that’s
why he goes.  He wants so much to see you.”  Catherine made no response
to this, and Mrs. Penniman went on.  “I didn’t know him at first; he is
so remarkably changed.  But he knew me in a minute.  He says I am not in
the least changed.  You know how polite he always was.  He was coming
away when I came, and we walked a little distance together.  He is still
very handsome, only, of course, he looks older, and he is not so—so
animated as he used to be.  There was a touch of sadness about him; but
there was a touch of sadness about him before—especially when he went
away.  I am afraid he has not been very successful—that he has never got
thoroughly established.  I don’t suppose he is sufficiently plodding, and
that, after all, is what succeeds in this world.”  Mrs. Penniman had not
mentioned Morris Townsend’s name to her niece for upwards of the fifth of
a century; but now that she had broken the spell, she seemed to wish to
make up for lost time, as if there had been a sort of exhilaration in
hearing herself talk of him.  She proceeded, however, with considerable
caution, pausing occasionally to let Catherine give some sign.  Catherine
gave no other sign than to stop the rocking of her chair and the swaying
of her fan; she sat motionless and silent.  “It was on Tuesday last,”
said Mrs. Penniman, “and I have been hesitating ever since about telling
you.  I didn’t know how you might like it.  At last I thought that it was
so long ago that you would probably not have any particular feeling.  I
saw him again, after meeting him at Marian’s.  I met him in the street,
and he went a few steps with me.  The first thing he said was about you;
he asked ever so many questions.  Marian didn’t want me to speak to you;
she didn’t want you to know that they receive him.  I told him I was sure
that after all these years you couldn’t have any feeling about that; you
couldn’t grudge him the hospitality of his own cousin’s house.  I said
you would be bitter indeed if you did that.  Marian has the most
extraordinary ideas about what happened between you; she seems to think
he behaved in some very unusual manner.  I took the liberty of reminding
her of the real facts, and placing the story in its true light.  _He_ has
no bitterness, Catherine, I can assure you; and he might be excused for
it, for things have not gone well with him.  He has been all over the
world, and tried to establish himself everywhere; but his evil star was
against him.  It is most interesting to hear him talk of his evil star.
Everything failed; everything but his—you know, you remember—his proud,
high spirit.  I believe he married some lady somewhere in Europe.  You
know they marry in such a peculiar matter-of-course way in Europe; a
marriage of reason they call it.  She died soon afterwards; as he said to
me, she only flitted across his life.  He has not been in New York for
ten years; he came back a few days ago.  The first thing he did was to
ask me about you.  He had heard you had never married; he seemed very
much interested about that.  He said you had been the real romance of his
life.”

Catherine had suffered her companion to proceed from point to point, and
pause to pause, without interrupting her; she fixed her eyes on the
ground and listened.  But the last phrase I have quoted was followed by a
pause of peculiar significance, and then, at last, Catherine spoke.  It
will be observed that before doing so she had received a good deal of
information about Morris Townsend.  “Please say no more; please don’t
follow up that subject.”

“Please don’t, Aunt Lavinia,” said Catherine, getting up from her seat.
She moved quickly away, and went to the other window, which stood open to
the balcony; and here, in the embrasure, concealed from her aunt by the
white curtains, she remained a long time, looking out into the warm
darkness.  She had had a great shock; it was as if the gulf of the past
had suddenly opened, and a spectral figure had risen out of it.  There
were some things she believed she had got over, some feelings that she
had thought of as dead; but apparently there was a certain vitality in
them still.  Mrs. Penniman had made them stir themselves.  It was but a
momentary agitation, Catherine said to herself; it would presently pass
away.  She was trembling, and her heart was beating so that she could
feel it; but this also would subside.  Then, suddenly, while she waited
for a return of her calmness, she burst into tears.  But her tears flowed
very silently, so that Mrs. Penniman had no observation of them.  It was
perhaps, however, because Mrs. Penniman suspected them that she said no
more that evening about Morris Townsend.

Mrs. Penniman, however, with her high conception of the sanctity of
pledges, carried her point.  “I have gone too far to retreat,” she said,
though precisely what this meant she was not at pains to explain.  “Mr.
Townsend wishes most particularly to see you, Catherine; he believes that
if you knew how much, and why, he wishes it, you would consent to do so.”

Catherine listened to this wonderful speech without pausing in her work;
she had now had several days to accustom herself to think of Morris
Townsend again as an actuality.  When it was over she said simply,
“Please say to Mr. Townsend that I wish he would leave me alone.”

“Mr. Morris Townsend.”

She would never have known him.  He was forty-five years old, and his
figure was not that of the straight, slim young man she remembered.  But
it was a very fine person, and a fair and lustrous beard, spreading
itself upon a well-presented chest, contributed to its effect.  After a
moment Catherine recognised the upper half of the face, which, though her
visitor’s clustering locks had grown thin, was still remarkably handsome.
He stood in a deeply deferential attitude, with his eyes on her face.  “I
have ventured—I have ventured,” he said; and then he paused, looking
about him, as if he expected her to ask him to sit down.  It was the old
voice, but it had not the old charm.  Catherine, for a minute, was
conscious of a distinct determination not to invite him to take a seat.
Why had he come?  It was wrong for him to come.  Morris was embarrassed,
but Catherine gave him no help.  It was not that she was glad of his
embarrassment; on the contrary, it excited all her own liabilities of
this kind, and gave her great pain.  But how could she welcome him when
she felt so vividly that he ought not to have come?  “I wanted so much—I
was determined,” Morris went on.  But he stopped again; it was not easy.
Catherine still said nothing, and he may well have recalled with
apprehension her ancient faculty of silence.  She continued to look at
him, however, and as she did so she made the strangest observation.  It
seemed to be he, and yet not he; it was the man who had been everything,
and yet this person was nothing.  How long ago it was—how old she had
grown—how much she had lived!  She had lived on something that was
connected with _him_, and she had consumed it in doing so.  This person
did not look unhappy.  He was fair and well-preserved, perfectly dressed,
mature and complete.  As Catherine looked at him, the story of his life
defined itself in his eyes; he had made himself comfortable, and he had
never been caught.  But even while her perception opened itself to this,
she had no desire to catch him; his presence was painful to her, and she
only wished he would go.

“Ah, dearest lady, you do me injustice!” cried Morris Townsend.  “We have
only waited, and now we are free.”

Morris felt it to be a considerable damage to his cause that he could not
add that she had had something more besides; for it is needless to say
that he had learnt the contents of Dr. Sloper’s will.  He was
nevertheless not at a loss.  “There are worse fates than that!” he
exclaimed, with expression; and he might have been supposed to refer to
his own unprotected situation.  Then he added, with a deeper tenderness,
“Catherine, have you never forgiven me?”

“Ah, you are angry!” cried Morris, who wished immensely that he could
extort some flash of passion from her mildness.  In that case he might
hope.

Morris stood stroking his beard, with a clouded eye.  “Why have you never
married?” he asked abruptly.  “You have had opportunities.”

Morris looked vaguely round him, and gave a deep sigh.  “Well, I was in
hopes that we might still have been friends.”

“Good-bye, then,” said Morris.  “Excuse my indiscretion.”

“That was a precious plan of yours!” said Morris, clapping on his hat.

Morris took no notice of her question; he stood musing an instant, with
his hat on.  “But why the deuce, then, would she never marry?”

“Come back?  Damnation!”  And Morris Townsend strode out of the house,
leaving Mrs. Penniman staring.