Oh, a position is more than I should presume to call it

That sounds so fine.  I should like some quiet
work—something to turn an honest penny.

Ah, I don’t know what to answer when you say that!
You advise me, then, not to despair?

Ah, yes, with discretion

Well, I have been indiscreet, formerly; but I think I have got over it.
I am very steady now.

Were you kindly intending to
propose something for my advantage?

I am afraid I shouldn’t be able to manage that.  I must seek my fortune
here or nowhere.  You see, I have ties—I have
responsibilities here.  I have a sister, a widow, from whom I have been
separated for a long time, and to whom I am almost everything.  I
shouldn’t like to say to her that I must leave her.  She rather depends
upon me, you see.

Ah, my little nephews and nieces—that’s the very point!  I am helping to
bring them up,

I am a kind of amateur tutor; I
give them lessons.

If my situation becomes desperate I shall perhaps take the liberty of
reminding you!

I should have done so

if you had not had so much the
appearance of leaving your daughter at liberty.  She seems to me quite
her own mistress.

It was not long ago, certainly, I
admit that we have not been slow to—to arrive at an understanding.  But
that was very natural, from the moment we were sure of ourselves—and of
each other.  My interest in Miss Sloper began the first time I saw her.

I certainly had already heard that she
was a charming girl.

I don’t know what I might think of her if I were
her father.  I can’t put myself in that place.  I speak from my own point
of view.

She let me know as much, and I was very sorry to hear it.  I am greatly
disappointed.

I don’t think Miss Sloper is a
weak woman,

But your daughter doesn’t marry a category, She marries an individual—an individual whom she is so
good as to say she loves.

There is one thing you should add to them, the word of a
gentleman!

I see; you think I am an idler!

You think I would squander her money.

That’s because I spent my own, I suppose, I frankly
confess that.  I have been wild.  I have been foolish.  I will tell you
every crazy thing I ever did, if you like.  There were some great follies
among the number—I have never concealed that.  But I have sown my wild
oats.  Isn’t there some proverb about a reformed rake?  I was not a rake,
but I assure you I have reformed.  It is better to have amused oneself
for a while and have done with it.  Your daughter would never care for a
milksop; and I will take the liberty of saying that you would like one
quite as little.  Besides, between my money and hers there is a great
difference.  I spent my own; it was because it was my own that I spent
it.  And I made no debts; when it was gone I stopped.  I don’t owe a
penny in the world.

I am living on the remnants of my property,

Even admitting I
attach an undue importance to Miss Sloper’s fortune, would
not that be in itself an assurance that I should take much care of it?

For a twelvemonth!

Ah, you are not polite, sir!

Are you sure of that? are you sure your daughter will
give me up?

I too have a fund of
affection to draw upon!

Your opposition to my marriage is all the more
cruel, then!  Do you intend to forbid your daughter to see me again?

I don’t think she will,

She has gone too far,

I will say no more, sir!
